---
layout: post
title:  "WxFrog"
subtitle: "A generic graphical frontend for scientific calculations built with wxPython"
date:   2026-02-08 14:22:00 +0100
categories: [python, repository, gui]
featured: true
---
# Background
Repeatedly, I required to create a graphical user interface for a calculation done in python. There are several 
differing approaches -- one could imagine a spreadsheet like interface with one possible approach being to use an
existing spreadsheet program as a front-end, or to show a grid view and create a minimalistic spreadsheet experience. 

In my case however, the use-case is to interface models of chemical processes that can be visualized as a flowchart with
annotated live data. After having developed several such minimalistic user interfaces, it becomes evident that the GUI
code is very much the same, and there are plenty of features that can be implemented in a generic way.

# Concept
## Interfacing the model
[WxFrog] (hosted on [GitHub]) can host any underlying model that implements a simple interface:

- An `initialize` method for model initialization
- A query for the default input parameters of the model, represented as a nested dictionary with strings as keys and
  [Pint] Quantities as values.
- A `calculate` method to evaluate the model based on a given parameter structure, returning another nested structure
  with calculated model properties
- Methods to query and set the model's internal state as json-serializable data.

The model initialization and calculation is always performed in a separate thread, leaving the user interface 
responsive. An `iostream` is provided to the model on initialization, allowing to send output to an *engine monitor*.

## Features
The application displays a static background graphics (provided as a `png` file) on the main canvas. Based on a provided
configuration file, input parameters and calculated properties are displayed at given coordinates with custom formatting.

The user can then change the values of input parameters and trigger (automatically or not) the calculations to update.
Parameters and properties are always handled as [pint] `Quantity` objects, allowing to customize the units of 
measurement, and assuring consistency of physical dimensions.

Case studies can be run by varying one or many input parameters over ranges of values (linearly or logarithmically 
spaced). Selected sets of calculated properties for each case are then exported to the clipboard for pasting into a
spreadsheet program.

With chemical process calculations in mind, repeated structures of sub-structures of the calculated properties can be
exported as *stream tables*, also to be pasted into a spreadsheet program[^1].

[^1]: By demand, the main focus so far has been to make this work for MS Excel. Other spreadsheet programs require
different formats of the data in the clipboard in order for the data to be pasted, in particular if the pasted cells
are to be formatted.

[WxFrog]: https://wxfrog.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
[GitHub]: https://github.com/VolkerSiep/WxFrog
[Pint]: https://pint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/


